[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
PABLO SHMERKIN: OK,
so let's continue
discussing the proof of
Bourgain's projection theorem
and how it's similar
and different
from the corresponding statement
in the finite field setting.
So just as a quick
review because we
are going to keep
working with this concept
a delta, S, C, d set is
a subset of, let's say,
the unit ball or
maybe the unit cube.
It doesn't really matter.
So it has to live in some
bounded region of space,
such that, if we
intersect X with the ball
and look at the
delta-covering number,
this is controlled
by, well, first
of all, this
tolerance constant C,
then the radius of the
ball to the power S,
and then the size of all of X.
So it is a spacing condition,
and although this is not
part of the definition,
it is convenient to
imagine that the size of X
is maybe delta to the minus S,
although it doesn't have to be.
But it is in the setting of
Bourgain's projection theorem,
as I stated it.
And speaking of Bourgain's
projection theorem
as I stated it, let
me state the version--
well, not the
version, it's really
exactly the same theorem
I stated last time,
but using this language.
So Bourgain's projection
theorem, again,
so it's really exactly
the same statement,
just using this
language and rescaling--
suppose that X is in the unit
ball of R2 and is a delta--
oh, sorry, quantifiers.
So given t between 0 and
2, S strictly positive,
at most, 1, there exist
two parameters, epsilon
and eta positive,
depending on t and S,
so that the following happens.
If X is a delta t delta
to the minus eta set in R2
with size delta to the minus t,
and D the set of directions--
let's say in 0, 1--
is a delta S, delta
to the minus eta set,
then there exists a direction in
our set of directions such that,
if you look at the minimum
over all subsets of X,
which are dense in the sense
that the delta-covering number
is at least delta to the eta,
this tolerance parameter times
the delta-covering number of X,
and we project the subset, then,
no matter how I
choose the subset,
we get a gain over the, between
quotes, "trivial bound,"
which is less trivial
in this setting.
But nevertheless, this is
at least delta to the minus
t over 2 minus epsilon.
So epsilon is how much we gain.
And delta 2 to the minus
eta is our tolerance.
This is really the same
theorem as last time.
Last time, X was in
the ball of radius R,
and it was a unit of unit balls.
But we just scaled it down
by a scale of 1 over R.
And by the equivalences
for measuring
the delta-covering number
that I mentioned last time,
this is really the
same statement.
So last time, we saw that
the following is true,
even though we didn't
actually prove all of it.
Last time, we saw
that there exists
a polynomial, which is just
X1, X2, X3 minus X4, X5, X6.
That works.
So it exists a
polynomial such that,
for every S between 0 and 1 on--
OK, I didn't say it
this way last time,
but maybe let's introduce
also the two parameters here.
Last time, I stated
with just one parameter.
Of course, you can just
take epsilon and eta
to be the same by
taking the minimum.
So the whole statement, if
you replace epsilon and/or eta
by a smaller number,
is still true.
So we could just
take the minimum
and have just one parameter.
But I sort of want to
distinguish them because they
play different roles.
So there exists
epsilon and eta such
that if A is a delta S
delta to the minus eta set,
it may be contained in 0, 1.
And maybe let's assume
also that the size of A
is delta to the minus
S. Then the size
grows by applying
this polynomial.
And we discussed that this
is not enough to iterate,
because in order to iterate,
we need to know that Q of A set
also satisfies
these assumptions.
And this is not clear at all.
And in fact, it's not true.
So we need to improve.
To Q of A contains A
delta S plus epsilon delta
to the minus eta set.
If we knew this, then we could
iterate and keep growing,
so keep adding epsilon.
And because epsilon
is continuous in S,
we can get as close to delta
to the minus 1 as we want.
So today, we will
discuss how to do this.
So let me say that
it's not going
to be the same epsilon and eta.
So they're going to--
I mean, they will become
much smaller, but same order
of quantifiers.
So there exists S--
sorry, for every S, there
will exist eta and epsilon
so that this is true.
So this is what we
are going to mostly
discuss today and, hopefully,
then go briefly over how
to finish the proof.
But I will say, this is the
main difference with respect
to the finite field
setting, where we don't have
to worry about any of these.
So before coming back to
this, we'll take a detour,
and then we'll come back.
So let me state a lemma with
some basic properties of delta
S, C sets.
Suppose that X is a delta
S, C set in any dimension.
Then we make the following
two fairly easy but important
observations.
So maybe I should have
done this last time
to get some intuition about
what this concept does.
First of all, X is
large at all scales.
So the rho-covering number of
X is at least C to the minus 1
rho to the minus S for every
rho between delta and one.
I mentioned in passing
last time that this is true
for rho equals delta.
But in fact, it's
true for every rho.
And two, this concept is robust
under passing to subsets.
So if X or maybe
Y is a subset of X
and the delta-covering
number is,
let's say, 1 over K times the
delta covering number of X,
then Y is a delta
S C times K set.
So the constant C gets
worse by the parameter
measuring how dense
Y is in X, always
using delta-covering numbers.
So the proof of this
is fairly simple.
So let's do it.
We have to prove something.
Well, we need to show that
the rho-covering number is
something.
So the definition of
the rho-covering number
is the smallest number of rho
balls needed to cover the set.
So let's cover the
set by rho balls.
And let's see how
many balls we need.
So let's say we
cover the set by.
M balls of radius rho.
Well, then the
delta-covering number of A--
so the delta-covering
number is subadditive,
something which will
come up repeatedly today.
And this is just because
if we have a delta cover--
sorry, a rho cover--
sorry, a delta cover.
We are covering by
[INAUDIBLE] delta now.
If you have a delta
cover of each of these,
we can put them together, and
we get a delta cover of this.
So for this reason, the
delta-covering number
is subadditive.
So the delta-covering
number of A
is at most the sum
of the delta covering
numbers of A intersected
with these balls.
But by definition of
delta-covering set,
each of these is at most
C rho to the S times
the delta-covering number of A.
So we have a uniform upper bound
that only depends on rho.
So the center doesn't matter.
So this is just the definition
of A being a delta S, C set.
So this is at most M C rho to
the S delta-covering number
of A. So we see that
we can cancel out
the delta-covering number of
A, and we get the claim one.
So we get that M is at least
what is on the right-hand side
there.
But the smallest possible
M is, by definition,
the rho-covering number.
OK?
And II is even easier.
Well, we have to show that Y
is a delta D, C, of course,
would be S. So we
have to Y satisfies
the definition of delta-covering
number, so of delta, S set.
So we intersect with
the ball of radius rho.
Well, Y is contained in X. So
this is at most the same thing
with X instead of rho.
But X is a delta S, C set.
So this is at most
C times rho to the S
times the delta-covering
number of X.
But the delta-covering number
of X is at most K times
by the delta covering
number of Y, by assumption.
So this is at most CK rho to the
S delta-covering number of Y.
So we have checked that
Y is a delta, S, CK set.
So what information have we
gained regarding our task?
So we need to show that Q of A
contains a delta S plus epsilon
delta to the minus eta set.
Well if it contains
such a set, then Q of A
must satisfy the conclusion of
the first part of the lemma.
So the rho-covering number
of Q of A has to be large.
We have proved that the
delta-covering number is large.
It is not sufficient, but it is
necessary to show that Q of A
grows at every scale.
We want to show that it
contains a delta t over 2
plus epsilon something set.
So it needs to be
large at all scales.
So we see that we need Q of A at
scale rho to be larger than rho
to the minus t over 2
minus epsilon for every rho
between delta and
1 And a priori,
we only know it for delta.
So what we discussed last time
is that this is true for delta.
And again, this
is not sufficient.
Yes?
AUDIENCE: Does that say, rho
to the minus S minus epsilon.
PABLO SHMERKIN: Rho to the--
so now-- OK, so this was a
general statement about delta S
sets.
And now I'm going back to
what we are trying to achieve.
Oh, sorry, S--
yeah, so there is--
sorry.
Yeah.
So this is still not
Bourgain's projection theorem.
We are working with
just one setting, 0, 1.
Thank you.
We need this to be true.
And OK, so one we could
think that we have it for
free because why can't we just
apply what we know at scale rho?
So this is a question for you.
So why-- so again,
this is necessary.
It's not sufficient.
But OK, let's try to focus
on getting this first.
So why don't we get it for free?
So what is the difference
between rho and delta?
So that's the assumption
that we have over there.
Yes?
AUDIENCE: Because we don't know
that A is rho, S [INAUDIBLE]
PABLO SHMERKIN: Well, OK.
So the assumption is that A
is a delta S something set.
And you're right.
We don't know that A is
a rho S something set.
There is another thing that
could be a bit worrying--
I would say it's
less worrying-- which
is that delta to
the minus epsilon
is not rho to the minus epsilon.
We would need rho to
the minus epsilon.
Delta to the minus
epsilon is much bigger.
This last thing is not so
serious because we can always--
the last thing is
not so serious.
Neither of them is so
serious in some sense.
But the second one, maybe we'll
come back to discussing later.
But it is less serious.
The main issue is that--
so we don't get this for
free, because A needs not
be a delta rho delta to
the minus epsilon set.
And we also would need
rho here, but let's ignore
this for a moment.
And my parameters are all wrong.
Rho S delta to the
minus epsilon set.
And also, even if
we did, we still
have the issue that this is
necessary but not sufficient.
So this condition is
necessary, but not sufficient
for Q of A to contain
the delta S plus epsilon
delta to the minus eta set.
So we are going to
overcome these two
issues by passing to what
is known as uniform sets.
So now we make a new
detour, and we are
going to study uniform sets.
And so uniform sets
and uniformization
come up all the time in
studying these type of problems,
not only in this proof.
So maybe we will come up
again later in the course.
But it is what we
are going to use
to overcome these two issues.
So let's start by defining
what a uniform set is.
So definition-- so maybe
we've heard definition.
Let's do some notation so
we can write the definition.
So this is from last time.
But recall that I was
denoting the delta
to be the delta mesh cubes.
So we split our D into
cubes of side length delta,
and one of them has a
vertex at the origin.
So let's define D delta
a set X to be the cubes.
This is in any dimension,
so the cubes that
are hit by X. So these are the Q
cubes of side length delta which
hit X.
And let's define a
box-counting version
of a delta-covering
number by looking at this.
So let's define x delta
star to distinguish it
from the delta-covering
number to be
the cardinality of this set.
How many delta
cubes the set hits--
and we discussed last time that
up to a multiplicative constant,
that could depend on the ambient
dimension, but we don't care.
This is really the same as
the delta-covering number.
So in some sense,
they are the same.
But in order to work
with uniform sets,
this version is
better, as we will see.
So we are counting how many
of these are hit by the set X.
And we can compare
cubes with balls.
And this is why these two
things are comparable,
as we discussed last time.
Now we can give a
definition of uniform sets.
So a set X--
and now our reference-bounded
part of space is going to be
the unit ball--
not the unit ball,
the unit cube.
Not the unit ball,
So in 0, 1 to the d
is delta m uniform.
What is delta is a parameter in
0, 1 So it's a number in 0, 1.
And what is M?
A natural number.
And you should think--
so I will maybe
come back to this.
But you should think that
delta is fixed, but M is not.
So we fixed delta and
let M go to infinity,
something like this.
So we're going to fix
delta, and then M will grow.
But this is just a definition.
If the following happens, so for
every J between 0 and M minus 1,
and for every cube of size delta
to the J that intersects X,
we look at how many cubes of
the next generation hit X.
And the next generation is
delta to the J plus 1 cubes,
so for every scale
delta to the J.
So we're going to look
at scales delta to the J.
For every cube of one of these
scales that intersects the set,
we look at how
many-- sorry, star--
how many cubes of the
next-generation scale
hit X. And this is some number
that depends on the scale J,
but it doesn't depend
on the particular cube
Q. Let's draw a picture.
So this picture's to
understand what's going on.
And I guess we
actually want delta
to be not just a number in 0, 1,
but actually, a dyadic number.
This is a definition.
But in practice, we want
to get a dyadic number
so things are nested.
So let's draw a picture to
understand what's going on.
Suppose that delta is 1/2,
and we are in dimension 2.
So we look at--
OK, we have a set
X. Let's say that X
hits this 3 dyadic
squares of first level,
but it doesn't hit this one.
Then R0 will be 3.
There is only one cube
of first level, which
is the unit cube, by
the assumption that Q
lives in the unit cube.
So the unit cube has
size delta to the 0.
And X hits just one
of those because it's
contained in the unit cube.
Now, we split each of
the surviving squares,
again, dyadically.
And what uniformity means
is that the number in each
of these three cubes
that are hit by X
is the same for all three cubes.
But the actual cubes
could be different.
So for example, X could hit
this one, this one, this one,
this one, this
one, and this one.
So this is a possibility.
And in this case, R1 will be 2.
So every of these
three cubes that
survived in the first
generation hit two cubes
of the second generation.
And what is important is
that it is 2, 2, and 2,
the same for all the cubes.
This is what makes it uniform.
Now we could keep going.
So maybe in the next
generation, every one of these
will hit just one.
It could be anywhere.
Then R2 would be 1.
Is it clear what
a uniform set is?
So we can see the
set X as a tree
where the root is the unit cube
the vertices of first level.
So the children of the unit
cube are the squares of size 1/2
hitting the set, the
cubes of size 1/2 squared.
So delta squared will be
the children of the vertices
of the first level, and so on.
Yes?
AUDIENCE: How does
this work when
delta is the reciprocal
of an integer,
and you have this
kind of [INAUDIBLE]?
PABLO SHMERKIN: Otherwise,
things don't line up exactly.
It's not the end of the world.
But in practice,
we will see that we
are free to pick delta
satisfying certain--
well, at this stage,
delta could be anything.
But yeah, we are going to
pick delta dyadic, not just
reciprocal of an integer, but
reciprocal of a power of 2,
just in case.
Yeah, otherwise, things
are not exactly nested,
and this picture is not as neat.
So these numbers are
J. We call them--
so we can view as a
tree, X as a tree.
And for this reason, we
call them branching numbers.
OK, I'm having a very bad
blackboard management.
So let's show this
again for a second.
So in general, if we
have a rho S delta--
sorry, a delta S, C set, it does
not need to be a rho S, C set.
But if the set is
uniform, it is.
So this is one big advantage
of working with uniform sets.
So let's say-- so this
will overcome this issue
and also, actually, this issue.
If the set is uniform,
then this condition
is not only necessary, but
sufficient for the set to be--
yeah, so if we knew
that Q of A is uniform--
which we don't, but OK--
we have to work a lot to
actually make this work for us.
But if we have a uniform set,
then both of these issues
are overcome.
So if the set is uniform,
and it is a delta S, C set,
it is a rho, S,
slightly worse C set.
And if the set satisfies that
it's large at every scale,
then it is a delta S, C set.
So both of these
issues are overcome
by working with uniform sets.
OK, let me state how it works.
So let lemma-- so let
X be delta M uniform.
And let delta be big delta to
the M. So again, at some point,
we are going to fix big delta.
And then this is
not a restriction.
This is not a
restriction because delta
will be a constant.
So if delta, small delta,
is not big delta to the M,
we sandwich it between big
delta to the M And big delta
to the M plus 1 and
work with those powers.
So this is not a
big restriction.
Then if the size of X is
large, let's say, 1 over C rho
to the minus S, for every
rho, but in fact, we
don't even need every rho.
Let's say, for every rho in
1, delta, delta to the M.
So we only need this to be
true for powers of delta.
But the point is, if we
know that the size of X
is large at every scale,
then X is a delta S
and not quite C set, but--
well, up to some constant
that depends on delta.
But because delta will be fixed
at some point, this is harmless.
So for uniform sets,
it is sufficient to be
large at all scales for the
set to be a delta S, C set.
And what is the other issue that
we wanted to overcome with sets?
Oh, OK, and this one, as well.
And if X-- so X
is a uniform set.
If x is a delta S, C set,
then X is a rho, S, and again,
not quite C, but
we lose something
that depends on
delta, so we are happy
set for every rho
between delta and one.
Maybe an exercise
for you is to think
about why both of these
claims are false if we don't
assume that the set is uniform.
It does have to be uniform.
It's not true in general.
Any questions?
Yes?
AUDIENCE: I was a
little bit confused.
If X in a ball that was
covered, like you said,
like [INAUDIBLE] X, it's
not a rho S something set.
If X was like rho S
set, why does that
imply Q X as the [INAUDIBLE]?
PABLO SHMERKIN: OK,
so what we showed
last time is that, if
A is a delta S, C set,
forget about what is the C, then
Q of A at scale delta grows.
Well, that is true
for every delta.
So if the original
A was also a rho,
S, C set, then we
could apply what
we did last time with
Rho instead of delta
and get this conclusion.
AUDIENCE: It looks
like different rho
with different polynomial.
PABLO SHMERKIN: The
polynomial is fixed.
So in the order of quantifiers--
so maybe this is
still on some board.
Yeah.
You see, the
polynomial comes first.
The polynomial is fixed.
So it's actually A,
A, A minus A, A, A.
AUDIENCE: Oh.
PABLO SHMERKIN: The polynomial
doesn't depend on S,
doesn't depend on rho,
doesn't depend on C.
It doesn't depend on anything.
It's a completely
universal polynomial.
So it's really A,
A, A minus A, A, A.
Or there are other options.
AUDIENCE: Thank you.
PABLO SHMERKIN: Yeah.
OK.
So now we are seeing
both the lemma,
and you sort of see why
the lemma will be helpful.
Although, one has to be careful.
And we will be careful because
in order to overcome this,
we need A to be a
rho, S, something set.
So if A was uniform,
we would be happy.
But for the second one, we
need Q of A to be uniform--
not A, but Q of A.
So to overcome one issue,
we need A to be uniform.
To overcome the other issue,
we need Q of A to be uniform.
So we still will
have work to do.
But OK, let's go step by step
and let's prove this lemma.
And the proof of
the lemma will also
help us understand and
work with uniform sets.
So the idea is to
do everything just
at the scales powers of delta.
And any other scale we can
sandwich between powers of delta
because delta is a constant.
The sandwiching will only lose
a constant depending on delta.
So for the first--
OK, maybe let's give
it the letters A and B.
So for A, well, let's consider
rho, some power of delta.
Then what is-- so we have to
look at the intersection of A
with a ball of radius rho.
But instead of a
ball of radius rho,
let's use a cube of size rho.
And again, we can always
pass between cubes and balls
using only constants.
And this makes sense
because we want
to use the assumption
that the set is uniform.
So let's take a Q in delta
D delta to the J of--
I guess I called it X. We
fix one of the scales delta
to the J. We fix a cube
that intersects the set.
And what is this?
Delta is delta to the M.
So here, we are jumping
from scale delta to the J
to the delta to the M. When we
jump from scale delta to the J
to delta to the J plus 1,
we have R J plus 1 children.
Each of those children has
R to the J plus 2 children
and so on, up to R M
minus 1, with a star.
So you see what I have.
I wanted to have this star.
Without the star, this would
be true up to constants.
So every time we go down one
scale, every cube splits into R,
depending on the scale
number of offspring.
And the point is,
it doesn't matter
where the set is with
the number of offspring
is fixed, but the assumption
that the set is uniform.
So let's write this as R1, R
M minus 1, divided by R1, RJ.
What is the numerator?
Sorry 0.
We start at 0.
What is the numerator?
Yes?
AUDIENCE: Is it just a
delta-covering number of X?
PABLO SHMERKIN: The delta
are not covering number of X,
because we start at the
top and we go all the way
down to the bottom.
So the numerator is the
delta covering number of A.
And what is the denominator?
Sorry, actually, we
start at J because
of the way we define things.
So we stop at J minus 1.
So J, J plus 1, I
think, now is correct.
Yes?
AUDIENCE: Is the denominator
just a capital delta to the J
covering of A?
PABLO SHMERKIN: Exactly.
This is the delta to
the J covering number,
I guess with star--
because we split into R0
children, then R1 and so on.
And if we stop here, we
stopped at the scale delta
to the J, big delta to the J.
And now we use the assumption.
In part A, the
assumption is that--
sorry, I keep switching
around A and X.
The assumption is
that this is large.
So the fraction is small.
So the assumption is that, so
this is smaller up to a constant
because now I'm going to go
back to standard delta-covering
numbers.
This is C, rho to the S
delta-covering number of A--
X, sorry.
So we are done.
So we took a cube of size delta
to the J. Sorry, delta to the J.
So this is rho S.
So we took a cube of size delta
to the J. So delta to the J
is our Rho.
And we show that the
delta-covering number of that
is a constant, rho to the S, and
the delta-covering number of X.
So this shows X is a delta,
S, C set at scales 1, delta,
delta to the M.
So it satisfies the condition
of being a delta S, maybe 0, 1--
sorry, 0 of C, 0 of 1
times C at these scales.
But then we sandwich a scale rho
in delta 1 between two of these.
And we are going to
lose some power of delta
by the sandwiching.
We are going to lose a power
of delta in the constant.
So this is why the constant
in the claim depends on delta.
An exercise is to
fill in these details.
But hopefully, this convinces
you that the claim is true.
Any questions?
And the second part
of the lemma says
that, if the original
set was a delta S,
C set, then it is also a
rho, S, slightly worse C set.
It is a very similar argument.
So it's really
the same argument.
So we do exactly the
same thing again,
except that now, instead of
delta, we have to write rho.
OK, let's do it again, but it's
basically the same argument.
b, so assume that rho is
delta to the J. Otherwise,
we sandwich as before.
Maybe delta to the J 0.
And then we have to
look at X intersection--
so now we take a
J which is at most
J 0 because we have to
see what happens when
we intersect X with
cubes or balls of size
larger than rho now.
And let's pick a cube, well,
of size larger than rho.
Then we intersect
X with Q. And now
we look at the
rho-covering number.
But it is exactly the
same story as before.
So what is this?
This is R J0, blah,
blah, blah, R J minus 1.
AUDIENCE: Does it start at
RJ and goes to R J0 minus 1?
PABLO SHMERKIN: Yes.
OK.
And this is R1 R J0 minus 1--
sorry, R 0, R 0,
R 0 R J minus 1.
And this is the covering
number at scale delta
to the J0 divided by the
delta-covering number at scale
delta to the J.
And because the set is a delta
S, C set, this is at most--
I'll do a constant because I'm
going to now delete the star.
This is at most C--
let's write it like rho to the--
sorry.
Let's try to do this correctly.
So what is this.
So here, we start
at the top and go up
to scale delta to
the J0, which is rho.
So this is actually A the
original set at scale rho.
We start at the top.
We go down to scale
delta to the J0
AUDIENCE: So is this A or X?
PABLO SHMERKIN: Sorry.
[LAUGHS] Sorry about that,
X. I should just call it A
and then-- but if I call
it in the statement,
then I will write X. So
it's not going to work.
It's X. There is just
one set which is X.
And the denominator is a
delta to the J covering
number of X. The
numerator I just
write the rho-covering
number of X without the star.
And for the denominator,
we use the previous lemma.
So we previously see I think
it's not in any board anymore.
Or maybe it is.
It is there.
We saw that, if
we have a delta S,
C set, then the
rho-covering number is
at least rho to the
minus S divided by C.
So we use that at this scale.
So this is our R.
So this has size R
equals delta to the J.
So we have shown what we wanted.
So now, if we replace
cubes by balls,
and we interpolate scales, so
we use just powers of delta,
we get that X intersection a
ball of radius R rho-covering
number is at most a constant,
at most a constant that
depends on delta that
comes from the sandwiching.
The original constant
that is here.
Then this is actually rho to the
minus S in the denominator, R
to the minus S in
the denominator.
So we get R to the S and then
the rho-covering number of X.
And that's the definition of
being a rho, S, slightly worse C
set.
Questions?
So we have seen that uniform
sets are much better behaved.
We can first of all, if it
is a good set of scale delta,
it is a good set at
coarser scales as well.
And also, it's enough
to know that the set is
large at all scales to know that
it has this spacing condition.
So how do we find uniform sets?
So this is the content
of the next lemma, which
is simple but
extremely important
and has lots and
lots of applications
all over the place--
but in particular, for
what we are trying to do.
Let.
little delta be big delta to the
M. And let X be a subset of 0, 1
to the d.
So we assume nothing about X.
And what the lemma says is that
x contains a "dense" which
encodes a uniform subset.
So what does "dense" mean?
Well, it means different
things in different settings,
so I'm going to prove a
slightly more general version.
So let mu be a subadditive
set function finitely--
set function, like a measure,
but the only axiom I assume
is that mu of a
plus B is less than
or equal than mu of A plus
mu of B, nothing else.
And a very good example
to keep in mind,
which is one of the examples
where this is useful,
but not the only one-- this is
why I state the more general
version--
is that mu of B can be the
delta-covering number of B.
So this is not a measure,
because it is not additive.
It is extremely far from
additive, but it is subadditive.
Then there exists Y, which
is contained in X, which is--
well, two things happen.
One is that Y is
delta M uniform.
And the second thing is that
Y is large measured by mu.
Mu of Y is large
compared to what?
Compared to mu of X.
So mu of X could be anything.
We don't know what it is.
Mu is something very general.
And we do lose something.
We lose something like 2
delta log 1 over big delta 2d.
Sorry, 2d is the ambient
dimension to the n,
to the minus n.
So here, the point is that
the scale is delta to the M.
And here, we have log of
1 over delta to the M.
So we lose something
exponential.
But if delta is small, it's
a very small exponential.
Maybe let's write it
in this equivalent way.
This is delta to the
minus sigma M mu of X,
where sigma is logarithm of
2d logarithm of 1 over delta--
so it's a double log--
divided by log of 1 over delta.
So if we make
delta small enough,
we can make sigma,
arbitrarily, close to 0.
So in practice,
at some point, we
are going to choose this
delta so that this is
small enough for our purposes.
And from that point on, delta
will be fixed, but M will not.
So M will go to infinity.
Proof of the lemma--
AUDIENCE: Where it says
delta to the minus sigma M,
is it just delta
to the minus sigma?
PABLO SHMERKIN:
Plus sigma M, sorry.
Yeah.
Yeah, so the measure--
it doesn't have to be a
measure, but the measure of Y
is not much smaller
than the measure of X.
But not much smaller depends
on your point of view.
So we do lose some
exponential thing.
But the sigma is as
small as you want
by choosing delta small enough.
Yes?
AUDIENCE: So you said, we
fix sigma, that is in delta,
and then we let
M go to infinity.
So does that blow up?
PABLO SHMERKIN:
Yeah, it blows up.
So it's not a--
yeah, it blows up.
But it blows up like a power.
But the power is
arbitrarily small.
Sorry.
Ah.
Sorry, bad day with typos.
Delta to the sigma.
So small delta is
big delta to the M.
So small delta is big
delta to the M. So this--
OK, sorry about this.
So this is delta to the
sigma by definition of sigma.
And actually, it is
delta to the minus sigma.
[LAUGHS] Sorry.
This is delta to
the minus sigma.
By definition, this is
the definition of sigma.
So this is big delta
to the sigma M. Big
delta to the sigma M is
small delta to the sigma.
So yes, as M goes to
infinity, delta goes to 0.
This goes to 0, but it goes to 0
as a power, which is arbitrarily
small.
So this is the way we
should think about this.
Sorry.
Is it correct now?
OK.
So the proof is some
clever, clever pigeonholing,
starting from the
bottom of the tree.
So the proof is trim the tree
starting from the bottom.
So we have this at X,
and let's call it XM.
And we are going to construct--
by pigeonholing
from the bottom, we
are going to construct a
nested sequence of sets
all the way down to X0.
And this is going to be our
Y that we are looking for.
OK, so let's explain.
I'm going to explain how
to construct XM minus 1,
and then we just continue
the same way by induction.
So we have XM,
which is X, really.
So we have all the
cubes of size delta
to the M minus 1 that
intersect the set.
But the branching numbers
could be different.
So this could be
4, this could be 1,
this could be 2, 2, and so on.
And we want we want
them all to be the same.
So we are just
going to pigeonhole
the most popular value.
Because there are
too many values,
we are going to
do it dyadically.
So that's basically the proof.
So let's write it down.
So let XM minus 1 l be the
union of all the queues
which are squares
of level M minus 1
that intersects the original set
such that the branching numbers,
or the number of
descendants of generation
M, so Q intersection X delta
to the M star covering number
is roughly 2 to the l.
And what are the
possible values of l?
Well, it could be 0 because
there is at least one--
because the cube
intersects X, there
is at least one descendant.
And the largest it
could possibly be--
so the largest 2 to the l can
be is delta to the minus D.
So each time we go
down one generation,
we subdivide into relative
scale 1 over delta,
and we have D dimensions.
So l ranges from 0
to the logarithm of--
well, D logarithm
of 1 over delta.
So we pigeonhole.
Mu is subadditive.
So you see that
this is what we use.
So mu of X is this.
These sets cover X.
So mu of X is at most
the sum over l of mu XM.
So it is X, but
let's write it as XM
so it's clear how to continue
inductively, X minus 1 l,
and l takes D log 1 over
delta possible values.
So there exists some l such that
mu of x minus 1 l has measured
at least-- maybe let's
put a tilde just in case--
1 over the log of 1 over
delta times the measure of X.
And so what the situation now?
Now we know that the
number of offspring
is constant up to a factor of 2.
So here there could be 7.
Here there could be 8.
Here there could be five.
Well, in that case, we are going
to keep the 4 with the largest
mass, which, again, we can
do by subadditivity of mu.
So inside each Q which
is a subset of these,
so the ones that survived,
keep 2 to the l cubes--
exactly 2 to the l.
So there are between 2 to
the l and 2 to the l plus 1.
We give exactly 2 to the l
cubes of size delta to the M.
By doing this, we lose
another factor of 2.
So this is why we have
2d log of 1 over delta.
Maybe it should be 4
or something like this.
But of course, it
doesn't matter.
Let X M minus 1 be the
union of all of those.
So first, we do
dyadic pigeonholing
because in dyadic
pigeonholing, things are
constant up to a factor of 2.
Then I trim again to
make it exactly constant.
Then I only lose a factor of 2.
So by doing this, now we
have our set X M minus 1.
And the size-- sorry, the
size in terms of the measure.
So the measure could be
the delta-covering number,
but it could be other things.
So the measure of X M minus 1 is
bigger than 1 over to the log 1
over delta times the
measure of X and D
set is now uniform
at the last scale.
So every Q that intersects this
new set has some fixed number--
let's call it R minus
1-- descendants.
So this will be 2 to the l
for the l that we pigeonholed.
And now we take X
M minus 1, and we
keep going up until all the way
up to the top, until we get X0.
And then we have to convince
ourselves that X 0 works.
OK, so one thing is clear.
Every time we iterate,
we lose this factor.
So we lose this factor M times.
And that was the second
part of the claim.
And the second claim is
that the set Y is uniform.
Well, every time we
do this, it becomes
uniform from one
scale to the next.
And the only thing that
needs to be observed
is that this is preserved.
So when we go up from scale
M minus 1 to scale M minus 2,
we don't mess up the
uniformity that we already had.
And let me do a
proof by picture.
Let's say that, in
the first stage,
we chose these three cubes.
And each of them has the
same number of descendants.
In the next stage, we
might remove some of these.
But it doesn't matter.
Let's say that we remove
this one in the next stage.
So the ones we keep still
have the uniformity.
So we don't destroy
the uniformity
that we already obtained
at finer scale scales
when we go to coarser scales.
So it is uniform.
So this is the proof
that, given any set,
we can find a dense in this set,
dense up to delta to the sigma
such that it is also uniform.
And well, by taking mu to be
the delta-covering number,
it is literally dense
in the standard way.
But sometimes it's convenient,
as we will see or maybe not,
depending on time.
It is convenient
to take other mu's.
This is why I stated
it in this way.
Any questions?
Again, all of the tools that
we have been discussing today
are useful not
just in this proof,
but all over the place
in projection theory.
Yes?
AUDIENCE: I'm a bit confused
by this construction.
Yeah, I [INAUDIBLE] on
level 1, everything's--
the degree is the same.
But if you do induction
for each subtree,
you can only guarantee that
the degree inside each subtree
are the same.
You cannot guarantee the degrees
between different subtrees are
equal, right?
PABLO SHMERKIN: What do you
mean, different subtrees?
AUDIENCE: The first cube you
divide this [INAUDIBLE] cube
into four cubes and
[INAUDIBLE] three yellow ones.
And these three yellow
ones have the same number
of smaller boxes.
But then-- yeah, as
my understanding,
you kind of do an
inductive argument
for each of those
three yellow boxes.
PABLO SHMERKIN: No, we
start from the bottom.
So--
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]
PABLO SHMERKIN: Yeah,
what is confusing you,
you're thinking about
starting from the top.
AUDIENCE: Yeah, yeah, right.
PABLO SHMERKIN: You
cannot start from the top,
precisely because of
what is confusing you.
It wouldn't-- I mean,
you cannot make it work.
But we start from the bottom.
And this is exactly why
we start from the bottom.
AUDIENCE: OK
PABLO SHMERKIN: When
We go from the bottom
to the top, everything,
every uniformity that we gain
is preserved when
we keep iterating,
moving in the up direction.
AUDIENCE: OK, yeah,
that makes sense.
Thanks.
PABLO SHMERKIN: Mm-hmm.
So in the remaining
14 minutes, let's
try to go back and
see how all of this
helps us deal with
the issue that we had.
Maybe let's keep the lemma
So let's go back.
So now we go back to our goal.
So A is a delta S. So this
C is delta to the minus eta.
But that's not where
the issue lies.
On the other hand, if you want
to write the things correctly,
you have to keep track of many
parameters and how they change.
And I'm not going to be
able to do that today,
so let's ignore this.
So we know that Q of A has
large size at scale delta.
So the first thing we do
is we replace-- so Q of A
is A, A, A minus A,
A, A. So by using
similar techniques or
basically the same techniques
that you are already used
in the finite field setting,
we can get the
following conclusion.
There exists one A in A, such
that A plus little A, A grows.
It's not the same epsilon.
So every time I write epsilon,
it's a different epsilon.
Is that OK, or do you want
me to write the epsilon 1?
We lose a lot.
So this epsilon, we lose a lot.
So this is similar to
the finite field setting.
This uses a Ruzsa's
triangle inequality.
I guess the main thing it
uses is Plünnecke-Ruzsa.
And as I explained last
time, all of these things
are still true for
delta-covering numbers.
So uses Plünnecke-Ruzsa,
Ruzsa's triangle inequality,
and I guess, maybe
some double counting.
So I'm not saying
this is trivial,
but I hope you did something
similar in the finite field
setting.
OK, great.
Second, we can assume
that a is uniform.
So first, we assume
that A is uniform.
And second, we do this.
Maybe this is better.
So A is uniform.
So we have to choose, at this
stage, delta small enough.
So here, the mu is just
the delta-covering number.
So we apply the
uniformization lemma.
So we start with
the delta S, C set.
Now we pass to a uniform subset.
The uniform subset is
dense up to a factor delta
to the epsilon--
not epsilon, delta
to the sigma, where
sigma is as small as I want.
Then subsets of delta,
S sets are still
delta, S sets by the
lemma that we saw before.
This is why we can assume this.
Now, this constant
is going to become
worse by a factor of
delta to the minus sigma
because that's the density.
So C gets worse by delta
to the minus sigma.
But sigma is arbitrarily small.
So I'm going to ignore it.
So you have to keep track
of all of these parameters.
But they are not the real issue.
You have to be
careful about that.
They are not the real issue.
Then, this A still
satisfies the assumptions
of what we did last time.
So this is really
the first step.
And so we know that a for the
uniform one A, A, A minus A,
A, A grows.
So already, this grows.
But A is uniform.
So in fact, because
A is uniform,
by the lemma that we
used about uniformity,
this is true at every scale.
So in fact, we have
this at every scale.
The third thing that is going to
be important is that, a priori,
we only have one A
in A. But in fact,
once we have it for 1A in we
have it for almost all in a.
And maybe you have seen
this sort of argument
in the finite field setting.
but this is true for
almost all a and A
because we define A bad
to be the points in A such
that the conclusion we want--
so the second step is not true.
It doesn't hold.
And if the set is large, we
can apply the same argument
to this set and get
a contradiction.
So a dense subset
of a delta S, C set
is a delta S,
slightly worse C set.
How much worse a constant is
depends on how dense A bad is.
So if A bad is too dense,
we get a contradiction.
So it cannot be too dense.
And this means that
very few A's are bad.
So almost all A are not bad.
Well, the step just 2 to A bad,
and we get a contradiction.
The first step is
maybe the key step.
So we are going to
upgrade the second step
to not just saying that A plus
little A, A is large, but--
so what is A plus little A, A?
It's pi A of A
times A. So we are
going to upgrade this to
say that this is still true
if we pass to a dense
subset of A times A.
So first step, if X is contained
in A plus A, and it is dense,
in the sense that the delta
covering number doesn't--
so at some point, there
should be a parameter eta
that I am completely ignoring.
Maybe at this step, we want
something like eta square dense.
Then if we project X,
we still have growth.
And in fact, at all scales,
or almost all scales.
Maybe instead of epsilon, the
growth will be epsilon over 2.
But there will still be growth.
Let me try to explain.
The first step in the
last five minutes.
So this is really, as we will
see, the absolutely key step.
We need to make this estimate in
the second step robust underpass
into dense subsets.
And we will see,
maybe next time,
why this is what we
really need to do in order
to conclude what we want.
So suppose that one is
in A, and this is just
for notational simplicity.
So there are two possibilities.
One-- OK, so we want
to show that there
exists an A with this property,
one a in A with this property.
I guess step 3 should
maybe be a later step.
Or maybe we want to
apply it at many steps.
So many steps, we prove
that something exists.
But once something exists,
actually, almost all elements
in A have this property.
OK, let's say we
want to prove that--
So at this stage we want
to get one in little A in A
so that this is true.
So maybe we are lucky.
And the first thing we choose--
and let's call it 1-- works.
Well, if it works, it works.
So first case--
A equals 1 works.
So it has this property.
Well, if it works, it works.
We are done.
So let's assume
that 1 doesn't work.
What does it mean that
A equals 1 doesn't work?
It means that there exists
some X in A times A which
has size bigger than
delta to the eta squared
or something like this times
the size of eta times A.
But the projection is small.
We have to do this
for every rho.
But let's do it one rho at a
time, and next time, I will--
let's do it for delta.
Next time, I will explain why
it's true for every delta,
in some sense.
OK, let's assume that, for
the particular scale delta,
there is no growth.
Well, this reminds you of what?
So there is a
theorem that you've
seen before that
should remind you of.
So we are projecting--
sorry, an A is 1.
Actually, A is 1.
So this is just the sum.
So we are-- so if 1--
we assume one is in A. Either
it is good-- if it is good,
we have proved what we want
because something is good,
or it's not good.
If it's not good, this is
what it means, by definition
of not being good.
B is G. So this is
exactly the assumption
to apply Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
So A has size delta
to the minus S.
Here we have a dense
subset of the product set
which has small partial sum set.
The pi 1 image is small.
It doesn't grow.
So these are exactly
the assumptions
that we need to apply
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
I've run out of time.
So we are in the middle of
the most important argument.
So maybe on Tuesday, sorry,
you will see me again.
I will start with
step 4 from the top.
But maybe as an exercise,
you have five days.
You can try to imagine
how this will continue.
So at least try to
well, just write
down what is the outcome
of Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers,
and try to think how we can
use that to eventually get what
we want, at least this claim.
Then I will explain how
this claim, together
with uniformization
lemma, allows
us to conclude what we want.